---
title: Madurai conquest

---

## 1. THE POLITICAL CONDITION PRECEDING THE CONQUEST
Among the territories that suffered the worst rapine and plunder was Ma'bar. According to Khusrau’ Ma’bar lay within that distance from Delhi which could be reached after a normal journey of twelve months. As Khusrau says, the Muslim arrows had never reached that distant land”. As regards the identity of ĪMa’bar there is no doubt. The region of the Coromandal east of Peninsular India might be said to correspond roughly to what was known to Arab geographers as Ma'bar. The author of Taquivim ul-Buldān quoted by Al-Qalquashandi (Subh ul-A-sha) (Ed. by Otto Spies) says that Ma'bar "lies to the east of Kaulam (possibly Kollam or Quilon at three or four days journey in a southerly direction”). Ibn Sa'ib quoted by the same source says, “it is well-known and muslin is exported from there; its washermen are proverbial" What was the condition of Ma'bar at that time ?

1. Khazā'n-Futuh.
2. Otto Spies: An Arab account of India in the 14th century, (page 38).

The Pāndyas who had taken the sovereignty of the South from the Cõlas were ruling with Madhurai as their capital and Bihr dhal or Vira Dhāvalpattanam as a sort of a secondary capital. The empire had, probably as a result of a dynastic feud, come under the rule of more than one king. Marco Polo testifies to the plural monarchy in Ma'bar. Epigraphical evidence lends con firmation to this position just on the eve of Malik Kafur's invasion. Dr. Venkataramanyya is of the view, which is tenable, that "each of these five princes seems to have held independent sway over some part of the empire, though the senior most or the most powerful of them was recognised as the supreme head of the state. He alone was most probably crowned; and on him devolved the right of directing the general policy of the empire”
Troubles set in when a war of succession started in the Pandyan Kingdom. Māravarman Kulasēkhara had two sons, Sundara and Vira, the former born of his queen and the latter born of a concubine. Kulasēkhara nominated Vira Pāndya to be his successor as he dis played great talents and remarkable shrewdness. Sundara Pāndya in great fury assassinated his father and crowned himself king. Vira Pāndya the heir designate met his half-brother in a battle near Madhurai and though he was not successful in the beginning, ultimately managed to drive away Sundara Pandya and seized the throne.
According to Wassaf, “Sunder Pandi, trembling and alarmed, fled from his native country and took refuge under the protection of Ala-ud-din of Delhi and Tira Pandi (Vīra Pāndya) become firmly established in his hereditary kingdom”. 4 This story is not easily acceptable as the event is placed in the middle of June 1310. Prof. Nilakanta Sastri rightly doubts its veracity because there are inscriptions of Kulasēkhara dated in his forty-fourth regnal year which commenced only in
3. Dr. N. Venkataramanayya: Early Muslim Expansion in South India.
4. Wassaf.
37
INTRODUCTION the middle of A.D. 1311.5 "It is very unlikely that re- . cords continued to be dated in the regnal years of a monarch who had died at his son's hands till more than a year after the event and that too near the capital of the kingdom”. Again while Amir Khusrau refers to the enmity between the two brothers (“the two Rais of Ma'bar, Bir Pāndya and Sundar Pāndya”) he does not mention Sundara's taking asylum in Delhi. But on the authority of Wassaf, most of the historians who have written on Malik Kafur's South Indian raids, say that it was Sundara Pāndya's treachery to vent a private wrath against his rival Vira Pandya that brought the Mussalman invader to the distant South. Even Wassaf does not connect the alleged flight of Sundara Pāndya to Delhi with the raids of Malik Kafur. There fore we will not be wrong in taking the raid of Malik Kafur as being timed at an opportune moment and that the Muslim invader was interested neither in Sundara Pāndya nor Vira Pāndya but in the fabulous wealth that belonged to both.
After a halt in the Yādava capital of Dēvagiri dur ing which Malik Kafur obtained from Rāmadēva (the Rāyi-Rāyan) all the materials needed for the Southern campaigns, the Malik started on his campaign guided in his route by one Paraşurām Daļavāi a deputy of Rāmadēva who had been instructed to lead the Muslim invader safe out of the Yadava territory. Dr. Venkata ramanayya thinks that the Yādava ruler who had been nurturing a deep grievance against the Hoysala Vira Ballāla III gave all possible assistance to Malik Kafur
5. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri: The Pandyan Kingdom.
38
MAD HURĂVIJAY AM
SW
in his campaign against Dwārasamudra. But, while such a view is not wholly untenable, there being noth ing to the contrary in the available sources, it will not be fair to question the conduct of the Yādava king by suggesting that he betrayed a fellow-Hindu ruler to avenge former wrongs on the part of the Höysala. The Yādava king was helpless when the Malik led his incredibly strong army into Dēvagiri and demanded help, not as an ally, but as a bully, on the point of the sword. Dr. Venkataramanayya himself refers to the fact of Malik Kafur having brought a "formidable force' with superior weapons. Naturally the same fear that later made Vīra Ballāla meekly submit to the mis deeds of the Malik made Rāmadēva offer all the help that the invader needed in his onward march against Dwārasamudra and Ma'bar.
Malik Kafur raided Dwārasamudra when Vira Ballāla III was absent at Ma’bar trying to capitalise the situation that had arisen as a result of the quarrels between Sundara Pandya and Vira Pandya. As Dr. Venkataramanayya thinks, Vira Ballāla must have considered the outbreak of civil dissensions in the Pāndyan kingdom, "a favourable opportunity for re gaining what his uncle and grandfather had lost”. Malik Kafur entered Dwārasumudra in February 1311 after doing great havoc en route. Vira Ballāla who had to hurry back from the Tamil country did not put forth any stout resistance to the Muslim invader because he knew that his military strength was nothing
a
Dr N Venkataramanayya: Early Muslim Expansion in South India: (M. U. Historical Series No. 17) Chap. on Alauddin Khilji. The
nd author has shown that the invasion of the Malik had no poli. tical significance..
39
SET
INTRODUCTION before that of Malik Kafur. He sued for peace and accepting humiliating conditions from the Malik, he agreed to be an ally of the invader in the latter's invasion of Ma'bar.
Malik Kafur's forces reached the frontiers of Ma'bar on the ides of March, 1311. Vira Pāndya, unlike Ramadeva and Vira Ballāla, preferred to give fight to the Muslims rather than meekly submit to them. He put all his strength into the fight and when the reck less invaders advanced, Vīra Pandya decided to flee for safety, and from Bir Dhul, where he was encamped he escaped, much to the consternation and chagrin of the avengeful Malik. As soon as Malik Naib discovered that he had been outwitted by Vīra Pāndya, he resolved to go to Kannanūr and proceeded with a regiment to Kannanūr. But Vira Pāndya gave the slip here also. Thus it was a regular game of hide and seek between Vira Pāndya and Malik Kafur. It was a great tragedy, which however could not be helped, that Baliāla had to play "the faithful ally”, to the marauding forces. After vain pursuits, Malik Kafur gave up the idea of capturing Vīra Pāņdya but turned his attention on the primary object of his raid, viz., plunder. From Kanna nūr he proceeded to Kānçipuram and laid waste the tem ples found in that great city. After plundering the tem ples, the Malik went back with his army to Bhir Dhul where he had originally struck camp. From Bhir Dhul his idea was to make a surprise attack on the Pāndyan capital where Sundara Pāndya was in authority. Sun dara Pāndya was forewarned; and by way of abundant caution he had left the city with his household, leaving a couple of temple-elephants in the city. The Malik's assault on Madhurai therefore proved a first rate mis
40
MADHURĀVIJAY AM
calculation. All that he could do was to set fire to the temple. Madhurai appeared to him to be too distant and unsafe a place for any lengthy halt. So he had to be more on the defensive in Madhurai. The Pandyan princes forgot their private quarrels at this hour of danger and under the leadership of Vikrama Pāndya launched an attack on the invading Muslims. This time Malik Kafur sustained a crushing defeat and had to beat a hasty retreat. But by now he had accumulated in his Southern raids a fabulous booty and he carried it safe to Delhi. In recognition of the loyal help that Ballāla ITT rendered to Malik Kafur, Alauddin decorat ed the Hoysala ruler's son at a special Durbar and presented him with the usual robes of honour.
Not a small number of historians have exaggerated the significance of the raids of Malik Kafur. The Tarikh-i-Firoz-Shahi mentions a larger booty than that mentioned by the Tarikh-i-Alai quoted above:? The in vasion of Malik Kafur had of course no political significance but as a brilliant military raid it had caused as much havoc as one could imagine.
