---
title: SAMBUVARĀYAS
unicode_script: devanagari

---
II. THE SAMBUVARĀYAS

## 1. VĪRA CHAMPA
The Madhurāvijayam, as its title signifies, is the story of the conquest of Madhurai by Kumāra Kampaņa told by his wife Gangā Dēvi. But the poem treats also of the factors which formed the prelude to the Madhurai conquest. The way to Madhurai lay through the Tondai mandalam which was at that time ruled by the Sambuva rāyas. It is not certain whether the Sambuvarāya kings were on friendly terms with the new kingdom of Vijayanagar. Apart from the political ambition to add terri tories to the kingdom, there was always the danger of the Muslims overrunning the whole of the Tamil country and proving a serious menace to Vijayanagar. Therefore, there was the need to clear the Tamil country of all forces detrimental to the existence and expansion of Vijayanagar. The Sambuvarāyas cccupied a strategic position in the Tamil country between Vijaya nagar and the Madhurai Sultanate. They should either be reduced to the position of feudatories to Vijayanagar or destroyed. Bukka placed emphasis on the need to remove all the political cobwebs before launching the attack on Madhurai. So the Sambuvarāyas were the first enemies of Vijayanagar that had to be tackled by Kampana. A brief account of the Sambuvaraya rule in the Tondaimandalam region will be of interest to students of early Vijayanagar history.

The Sambuvarāya chiefs of the Sengeni family ruled mainly in portions of the present North Arcot and Chingleput districts. They figure very prominently in the Cāla inscriptions as feudatories of the Cõlas. They distinguished themselves by leading the important campaigns on behalf of their overlords. Edirili Cõla Sambuvarāya of the period of Rājādhirāja Cola secured the departure from the Tamil country of the Singalese General, Lankāpura Dandanāyaka who had invaded the southern part of the Cola empire.

After the decline of the Cola imperialism the Sambuvarāyas, like the Kādavarayas, successfully carved out an independent principality for themselves possibly after a short period of subservience to the Pandyan empire. Kulasēkhara Sambuvarāya, who may be placed between 1278 A.D. and 1304 A.D. was the first Sambuvarāya whose inscriptions are found with regnal years.3 Kulasēkhara was succeeded by Vira Champa, also known as Rājanārāyaṇa Mallinātha.*

We do not know the relationship between Kulasēkhara and Vira Champa, but in all probability Vīra Champa was Kulasēkhara's son if the assumption that the feudatory Sambuvarāyas named their eldest son after their overlord is correct.5

1. For an account of the feudatory Sambuvarayas see Professor K. A. N. Sastri, The Colas.
2. Dr. S. K. Aiyangar South India and her Muhammadan Invaders,
page 16.
3. A.R.E., No. 77 is dated with a regnal year for Kulasekara.
4. There are a few Virachampa inscriptions extant. From the Ula of Irattaiyar we can establish the identity of Virachampa and Mallinatha.
5. There was the practice of feudatories naming their eldest sons after the ruling sovereign both in the Cola and in the Pandya kingdoms.


Vīra Champa lived during a troubled period in South Indian history, nay, in Indian history. Northern India was subject to the Khilji imperialism. For the first time Southern India had to bend before the onslaughts of the Muslim invaders during this period. In all probability Vira Champa was a witness to many of the ghastly deeds perpetrated by the invading forces under the leadership of Malik Kafur. There is no evidence of Vira Champa having done anything to check the progress of the invaders. Evidently he had simply to play the role of a silent spectator as he could not contend against the superior numbers which laid waste the country.
Vira Champa distinguished himself by his various acts of charity and piety. Both epigraphical and literary sources mention these. He made a golden crown fit enough to adore the head of Lord Ekāmbaranātha at Kāncīpuram. He also presented a beautiful car to the Lord. He built a huge Tulābhāramandapam in the city of Kānci. The Arulālaperumā! inscription of Vira Champa mentions his having presented another new car to the deity of that temple. Under his instructions and at his expense an ascetic by name Gnānātman built a mandapa called Bhadramandapa to the deity of Tiru vallam. The holy man also erected a shrine “in the very prosperous city of Valla” and named it Mārāya Siva. Here are the relevent portions of the ulā of Irattai yar celebrating the deeds of Vira Champa: 0

1. சம்பு தலத் தொருவன் சாத்துகைக் காம் என் றளித்த
செம்பொன் மணி மகுடஞ் சேர்வித்து .......... செம்பதுமை கேள்வன் திருமல்லிநாதனுயர் சம்புபதி
நல்குந் தடந் தேர் போல் 3.. ....... பரிபல்லவன் சம்பு தலப் பெருமான் வைத்த
துலாபார மண்டபத்தும்

6. Ekambaranatha Ula, (also the Abidhanacintamani).

Vira Champa was the first Sambuvarāya ruler known to have struck coins to signify his supremacy. These coins continued to be in circulation till a very late period—at least till after fifty years from his death. These coins are referred to in inscriptions as Viracham pan Guligai.?

Vira Champa had a highly talented minister by name Vanabhid who had a profound knowledge of Samskrit and who could compose poetry. It was he who gave publicity to the deeds of valour and piety done by the ruler.

Vira Champa assumed or was given the title of Nidravāsana Vijayī which means “the king who won victories at the time of the completion of his sleep". The Bilavanāthēswara inscription of the king mentions this biruda of his. This title, and the fact of his having issued coins are evidences not only of the independent rule that he had set up over the Tondaimandalam region but also of the important position he occupied in the Tamil country.

## 2. VENRUMANKONDA SAMBUVARAYA
The successor of Vīra Champa was Ekāmbaranātha Sambuvarāya alias Venrumankondān. He is known better by the title than by his real name. Only one inscription refers to his name and even that reference is incidental. The title Venrumaņkondān was assum ed by him almost at the beginning of his rule. A suggestion was made that this title might imply his having taken his kingdom from the Muslims. This was based on the incorrect supposition that no inscriptions of his, dated earlier than his fourteenth year, are available. But there is a second year inscription dated 1323 24 A.D., which contains the title Venrumankondān.10 Again there is no break between the periods of Vira Champa and Venrumankondān. Even assuming that Vira Champa ruled for eighteen years, as per an inscription of his, from 1304, which was the last year of Kulasēkhara, we get 1322-23 as the last regnal year for Vira Champa and the first for his successor. This is borne out by the data in Venrumankondān's inscriptions.

The only explanation for the title seems to be that Venrumankondân captured Kanci from the Kākatīya general Muppidi Nāyaka, who was in occupation of the city, having taken it from the Kerala conqueror Ravi varman, till about the accession of Venrumaņkondān."

9. Dr. N. Venkataramanayya: Early Muslim Expansion in South India. 202, “No traces of his (Venrumankonda's) rule are found in any part of the country before his 14th regnal.” Ibid., p. 203. It may ve reasonably assumed that Ekāmbaranātha Sambuvarāya reconquered the country from the Mussalmans.
10. Cf. A.R.E., 206 of 1929-30. The exact date of this inscrip tion is 1323—June, 13.
11. Dr. N. Venkataramanayya: The Early Muslim Expansion in South India, p. 90.

The departure of Ravivarman Kulasēkhara did not however, release the Pāndyan dominion from foreign domination. New invaders soon made their appearance, this time from Telungana. The Kākatīya King, Pratāparudra, sent a large army in 1317. A.D., to harry the country, and his general Muppidi Nayaka led the Telugu army victoriously up to the Kāveri, defeated the Pança Pāndyas in a battle near Kānci, and installed a Telugu governor in the city.

Also Prof. K. A. N. Sastri: Pandyan Kingdom, p. 213.

This expedition of the Kākatīya general seems therefore to have brought the northern part of the Pandyan Empire for a time under the control, more or less effective, of the Telugu rulers of Warrangal.

Perhaps Venrumaņkondān was a son of Vira Champa, whom he and his son Rājanārāyaṇa might have ad dressed as Anna (father). An inscription of Rājanā rāyaṇa refers to the former addressing Mallinātha as Annāchiyār.12

It is likely that Venrumaņkondān destroyed the Kākatīya rule in Kánci and in memory of the victory took the title of Venrumaņkondān.

12. Cf. A.R.E., 33 of 1933-34—(page 36 of 1933-34). 13. Dr. N. Venkataramanayya: Ma'bar (J.M.U.), pp. 43-54. 14. Cf. A.R.E., 434 of 1903—S.I.1. Vol. III. 15. Cf. A.R.E., No. 203 of 1912. 16 Dr. N. Venkataramanayya: Ma'bar, p. 43.

Venrumaņkondān's reign began in 1322, and the first two years of his reign seem to have gone on uneventfully. But we do not hear of him from his third to his fourteenth regnal year i.e., 1335-36. The cause of this interregnum is not far to seek. In 1323 the Muslims had occupied the southern part of the Tamil country13 and the horrors of the Muslim invasion had spread into the entire Tondaimandalam region also. A fourteenth year inscription of Venrumaņkondān refers to the havoc wrought by the muslims in the region.i4 Many inscriptions belonging to Rājanārāyaṇa also refer to the dislocation caused to normal life in the territory as a result of the Muslim occupation. Therefore, as Dr. Venkataramanayya has pointed out, “the extreme rarity, if not the total absence of Hindu inscriptions that are assignable to the interval between 1324 and 1335 seems to indicate that the Hindu political life was in a state of suspended animation and that the country was passing through a period of great distress.”:16

We do not know the exact nature of the Muslim occupation in the Tondaimandalam region. The fact that Venrumankondān could begin his reign again in 1335-36 shows that it had not been actually brought under Muslim rule, as the districts of Madura, Trichi nopoly and Tanjore had been.17 Perhaps the Muslims in the beginning of their South Indian conquest, scattered themselves over a very wide area, and after the conquest, consolidated their position in a few districts, having regard to their resources for the upkeep of the conquered territories.

17. The Muslim hold on Tiruchirapalli Tanjore and South Arcot must have been very slender. We have evidence that the Muslims had strengthened themselves in Ramnad district.
18. A.R.E., No. 276 of 1912. 19. A.R.E., 35 of 1933-34.


That Venrumaņkondān had busied himself with administrative arrangements throughout his reign is borne out by all his records. The Muslim invasion had created many social, economic and political problems. Migrations from one place to another had become the order of the day.18 The shifting of population from one village and the overpopulation of another created problems of a tough nature. Refugees came in large numbers into his territories and sought his protection.19 The professional communities were suffering want and misery. Venrumaņkondān thus took charge of an entirely changed kingdom in his 14th year, and no wonder he had to make it his life-work to restore normal life to it. He filled the Tirumadaivilāgams with their usual inhabitants. He provided for his subjects such amenities as water-sheds which had been destroyed during the period of his absence. He opened out some villages as centres for refugees and invited the helpless refugees to settle in them.20 He treated these new inhabitants with sympathy and consideration. He tried his best to encourage handi crafts and gave all sorts of concessions to the professional communities.21 He fixed the rates of taxes pay able by these, as low as possible. He also repaired or reconstructed many temples laid waste by the Muslims.22 Thus he saved his country from moral and political degradation,

While that part of the Tamil country south of the South Arcot district was going through a period of the worst political ordeal, Tondaimandalam was enjoying peace and passing through an era of reconstruction; and the credit of having restored normal life goes to a great extent to Venrumankondān.

That Venrumankoņdān had succeeded to a great extent in his uphill work of reconstruction is proved by references to activities of normal and peaceful life. An inscription of his dated in his seventeenth regnal year refers to the enactment of street plays in Kānçī puram and Tondaimandalam. The inscription says that a licence was obtained by a dramatic troupe from the ruler for enacting plays.23

20. A.R.E., 35 of 1933-34 coming from Kilminnal. Registers de tails of taxes payable by settlers of the village. The inscription says that the village was made an Anjinan Puhalidam, a place for refugees - in the name of the ruler's son, Rajanarayana, referred to as Ponnin Perumal. The taxes leviable from weavers colonising there was fixed at 1/4 panam per month on two workers of every loom and 1/8 nanam on others. The rules relating to taxes on oil press are not clear.
21. A.R.E., 47 of 1932. 22 ARE.. 45 of 1000; 453 of 1903; 42 and 48 of 1921. 23. A.R.E., 42 of 1921.

## RAJANARAYANA AND VENRUMANKONDAN II
Venrumaņkondān I was succeeded by his son Rājanārāyaṇa, the greatest Sambuvarāya ruler. It was during his period that the Sambuvarāya kingdom reached the height of its power and glory. Its terri tories included the entire districts of North Arcot, Chingieput and a part of South Arcot. The date of Rājanārāyana's accession according to astronomical data furnished by his inscriptions is 1338-39. The rela tionship between Venrumankondān and Rājanārāyana is mentioned in an inscription at Kuttiyam bearing the third regnal year of Rājanārāyaṇa in which Venruman kondān is referred to as Ayyāchiyār or father (of the ruler). On the death of Venrumankondān, Rājanā rāyana performed the necessary obsequies and also arranged for the ashes of his father being consigned to the Ganges, and the srāddha performed at Gaya. He pitched upon an Agambadi Mudaliär of the Palace Guard for carrying the remains to be mixed in the Ganges. The name of the Mudaliār, Elumbodan Gan gaiyādi Madhavarāyan, seems to have been assumed by him after his return from the Ganges. The Mudaliar, on his return, was granted the village of Kuttiyam alias
1. This is proved by the provenance of his inscriptions. In the South Arcot district, at Tirukkoyilur, there is a 17th year inscription of Rājanārāyaṇa, A.R.E., 82 of 1935-36.
2. A.R.E., 33 of 1933-34 Sakalalöka Chakravartin Ponnin Tambirān Rājanārāyana Sambūvaraya.
3. Ibid. Also A.R.E., 32 of 1933-34. Registers the grant of the villages of Kuttiyam alias Rājanārāyananallur free from taxes as Gan gāmana vritti to Elumbodan.
20
MADHURĀ VIJAY AM
Rājanārāyananallür (named after the chief) free of Hayes as Gangāgamana Vritti or maintenance for hav ing gone to the Holy Ganges. This Mudaliār was very much attached to Venrumaņkondān and he consecrated the shrine of Ekāmbranātha in Kuttiyam in the name of his master and made large endowments to it."
The first few years of Rājanārāyana's reign passed off almost uneventfully, but for a heavy flood which caused extensive damage to crops. This was in the sixth year of his reign. The king adopted relief measures one of which was the remission of the taxes payable both in cash and in kind on lands whose crops had suffered.
O
Rājanārāyana's relationship with Madhurai is not known. There is no evidence of his having come to any clash with the Sultanate. What made both keep their mutual peace is a mystery, What surprises us more is the fact that Rāja nārāyaṇa does not appear to have intervened during the wars in the South. We are now alluding to the great conflict between the Sultan and the Hoysala ruler, Vīra Ballāla III which culminated in the most tragic battle of Kannanur Koppam. This was the last
4. A.R.E., 33 of 1933-34.
5. Cf. A.R.E., 410 of 1912; 230 of 1901. S.I.I., Vol. VII, No. 410 from Marudur refers to a peruvellam in the 6th year. No. 230 a 7th year inscription, records that the king remitted taxes payable both in cash and kind on land whose crops had suffered as such lands could not be taken up for cultivation. This order was engraved on the walls of the temples at Tiruvallam, Gudimallur and Kalavai.
6. The Madhura Sultanate lasted between 1323 and 1371. The period between 1323 and 1334 was the period of the Delhi Viceroyalty in Madhurai. Cf., Dr. N. Venkataramanayya: Ma’bar, p. 42. The Sul tanate extended as far north as Chidambaram (roughly). Cf. Madhu voiauam which says that Vyāghrapuri had become the abode of tigers.
INTRODUCTION
21 fight in South India put up in order to save the land, from the onslaughts of the invaders and if Rājanārāyana had followed a policy of “non-intervention” to gain some private ends, and allowed the old Hoysala ruler to fight his enemy single-handed history would never put it to his credit.
Rājanārāyaṇa Sambuvarāya enjoyed very good popularity and the reason for this lies in his various acts of public charity. He continued the good work of his father and completed it. He revived worship in all temples; he reorganised the temple precincts; he revived handicrafts. The weavers who played an im portant part in temple life and whom the kings took into their confidence when settling disputes were still suffering from the after effects of the anarchy. In their despair they even deserted their respective Tirumadai vilāgams ånd caused a dislocation in temple administra tion. An inscription from Nerumbur? says: “The inhabitants of the Tirumağaivilāgam along with the weavers ran away to different villages”. Rājanārāyana coaxed the deserters into returning to their respective places, showing them all concessions. Besides the Tirumadaivilāgams which he thoroughly reorganised, he filled the empty villages with population and remit ted taxes due from the new settlers.
However, in spite of the good work done by Rāja nārāyaṇa and his father there were still symptoms of lawlessness. An inscription refers to the treachery
7. A.R.E., 276 of 1912.
8. A.R.E., 203 of 1912 (7th year). Many of the valuable belongings of the Tiruvorriyur temple had been buried underground for safety during the Muslim occupation of that territory. But most of these22
MADHURĀVIJ AYAM
practised by certain people who took away the valuable belongings of the temple. The matter had not been found out until very late, and by the time it was found out, the culprits had all died. But the king confiscated their lands and dwellings and made them over to the temple. The same inscription refers to the sale of lands and houses belonging to another private individual who had been punished for committing “a very serious state offence”.
Rājanārāyana had also to devote a good part of his time to the settiement of disputes. The most serious of these was that the temple servants called Ishaibhattali yilār, Dēvaradiyār and Padiyilār did not agree among themselves regarding the order of precedence in their service to the temple. The next in importance was a long standing dispute between the villagers of Uttara merür and Tiruppulivanam.10 The disputants were not amenable to any agreement for a long time. The dis pute itself concerned river-irrigation. There was a canal irrigating Uttaramerur, and feeding the tank of Tirupulivanam. The inhabitants of both the villages quarrelled about their respective rights over the con trol of the canal. The matter was finally settled amicably by arbitration and it was agreed that the canal should irrigate Tiruppulivanam, Mappandar, Pundi and Uttaramerūr.
were removed by the Tulukkar and appropriated. Such of the pro perty as had escaped their clutches (including a metal lamp stand) was stolen and similar acts of treachery were practised against god by certain private individuals. The Māheswaras and the trustees of the temple together with the agent of Bhuvanēkabāhudeva instituted enquiries into the matter in the Vyakaranadāna Mandapa.
9. A.R.E., 212 of 1912. 10. A.R.E., 200 of 1923.
23
INTRODUCTION Rājanārāyaṇa, though a Saivite, was tolerent towards all religions. He endowed both Siya and Vishnu temples. 11 The mention of a Jain temple and the setting up of a Jain image by a pious lady during the period of Rājanārāyaṇa suggests that Jainism was still enjoying royal patronage. 12 It might also be noted that an earlier Sambuvarāya ruler con structed at Pundi a Jaina temple dedicated to Ponni nātha but called Vira Vira Jinālaya and gave a large tax-free village to it for its support.13
Rājanārāyana's philanthrophy had become so in fectious that even private individuals came forward to supplement the noble work of their ruler.14
Turning our attention to the condition of trade and commerce during his period, we have some evidence to conclude that he did his best to promote them. Sadras was a flourishing trade centre and the suggestion that Rājanārāyana might have taken interest in its growth is got by the new name Rājanārāyaṇapattanam, given to the port, after the ruler.15 The reference to such com munities as Settis, Kaikkolar, Karrai-vada-vanigar and Sekku-vanigar and Saliyar and such taxes as Tarik
11. Cf. A.R.E., 113 of 1932-33. Among the Vishnu temples that he endowed, the Sthalasayanaperumal temple at Mahabalipuram de serves to be noted. During the date of Rājanārāyana the God of the
12. Southe own as Ulagaland a date of RājanāriMahabalipuram dat
12. South Indian inscriptions, Vol. I. 70, p. 102. 13. A.R.E., 58 of 1900.
14. An inscription dated in the 19th regnal year of Räjanārāyana contains the interesting information that the various communities, oil-mongers, washermen and others, collected donations and completed the construction of a temple which had been left incomplete, at Madhevimangalam. A.R.E., 53 of 1933-34. For this act of charity the taxes on these communities were remitted. Also Cf. A.R.E., 36 of 1933-34.
15. A.R.E., 103 of 1932-33.
 24
 MADHURĀVIJAYAM
 kadamai and Pērkkadamai also gives us a hint that handicrafts had come back to their own thanks to the interest evinced in them by Rājanārāyaṇa and his father.16
 The highest regnal year found in Rājanārāyana's inscriptions is twenty and we can therefore conclude that his reign ended by 1359 A.D." Rājanārāyana assumed a number of titles and they are: Ponnintam biran and Ponninperumal.18
 Rājanārāyaṇa was followed by his son Venruman kondān, whom we may call Venrumankondān II, but he does not appear to have ruled for any length of time. The final attack of the Vijayanagar prince was directed against him and he did not survive it.
 was
 lan
16. A.R.E., 298 of 1910 Tarikkadamai and Pērkkadamai payable by the Kaikkolar, Sāliyar and Vānigar.
17. A.R.E., 36 of 1933-34 from Kilāminnai, 13. A.R.E., 33 of 1933-34,
 IV. VIJAYANAGAR INVASIONS OF
 TONDAIMANDALAM
1. THE SAVANNA INTERREGNUM
It is believed by some scholars that it was Venrumankondān I the Sambuvarāya ruler (1322 1339) who was overcome by Kampana. But this view is far from correct as the earliest inscription of Kam pana bears only the date 1352.2 His invasion of Tondai mandalam could never have taken place prior to that year. Venrumaņkondān had a peaceful death and the period was also calm and quiet in his territory, and this is borne out by the fact that his son Kājanārāyana was able to send the remains of his royal father to be consigned to the Ganges..
1. Dr. S. K. Iyengar: South India and her Muhammadan In vaders: p. 15 and pp. 60-61. The epigraphicai reporis, too, contain the mistake. Dr. S. K. Iyengar seems to be caught in confusion when we read his lectures, two and six. An analysis of the points he has raised in these two lectures regarding Kampaņa's defeat of the Sambuvarāyas will show the confusion. In his second lecture he says: "We find two rulers who assumed high titles indicating independence. Of these the first is Sakalaloka Chakravartin Venrumaņkonda Sambuvarāyan whose date of accession is A.D. 1322-23 followed by Sakalakūka Chakravartin Rājanārāyana Sambuvarāyan whose date of accession is 1337-38 and whose reign extended upto 1356-57. It was apparently this later ruler that was overcome by Prince Kumāra Kampana of Vijayanagar." He changes his view in the sixth lecture and states an entirely new theory: "It looks very probable that it was Sakalalokachakravartin Venrumaņkondan Sambuvarāya whose date of accession is Saka 1245 (1322-23) that was overthrown by Kampana, sometime about 1347 which is the first date of his successor Sakalalökachakravartin Rājanā rāyaṇa Sambuvarāyan.” We are at a loss to understand why the learned professor propunded such theory and how he got 1347 as "the date of the defeat of Venrumaņkondīn by Kampa.
2. Cf. A.R.E., 297 of 1919, (dated saka 1274). 3. Cf, A.R.E., 32 of 1933-34,
4
26
MADHURAVIJAY AM Rājanārāyana's rule must have extended upto, at least 1359, as we have inscriptions of his bearing his 20th regnal year. The presence of Vijayanagar inscrip tions in his territory in the eleventh and twelth years of his rule implies that he had come into clash with the Vijayanagar rulers already. If Kampana's invasion had taken place by about 1351 we have to account for the following: (1) The Madhurāvijayam explicitly says that the Sambuvarāya ruler was killed in the battle. If Rājanārāyana had been killed in 1351-52 how could records have been issued in his name after this date ? (2) Some of Kampaņa's relations and generals who were associated with the campaign assumed the title Sambuvarāya sthāpanācārya, meaning 'establisher of the Sambuvarāva.? Where does the question of esta blishing come in, if the Sambuvarāya had been slain in battle ?
in answer to the above it may be pointed out that the Madhurāvijayam refers only to the ultimate con quest of the Tondaimandalam region. We have evi dence from epigraphs also for that conquest.? There fore, we have to see in Kampaña's Tiruvannāmalai inscription, an evidence of a preliminary conquest in which Kampaņa probably played a minor part but
4. Cf., A.R.E., 36 of 1933-34 from Kīlminnal. 5. Cf. A.R.E., 297 of 1919 No. 357 of 1928-29.
6. Mangu took this title as will be noted in a later chapter. Some of the members of the Sāluva family also assumed this title till very long after the actual event of the Sambuvarāya defeat. Sāvanna Udaiyār also took the title. Also refer to the Udāharanamāla (Sources: pp. 49 and 50), where another member claims to have overcome Champa.
7 Eg Cf. 18 of 1899 (also p. 22 of the same report) dated saka 1287 (1365 A.D.), ref. to the taking 'permanent possession of Rājagam bhīrarājya.'
INTRODUCTION
27 some one else on Kampaņa's side played the significant , part. We have a number of inscriptions in the Tamil country, belonging to Sāvanna Udaiyār, son of Kampa I, Viceroy of Udaiyagiripattanam. These inscriptions bear regnal years. One of these bearing the regnal year 1350 is possibly one of the earliest Vijayanagar inscrip tions discovered in the Tamil country. Sāvaņņa Udai yār succeeded to his father's Viceroyalty in Udaiyagiri and assumed the title the Lord of the Eastern Ocean. He seems to have been fired with the same enthusiasm as roused Kampaņa to action and came to the South as his inscriptions indicate, with the same objects as Kampana's, viz., putting an end to the Muslim rule and vanquishing the ruler of Tundīra. It is not un likely that Kampana and he had a previous under standing by which they were to start on the campaigns simultaneously from their respective headquarters Kampana eastward and Sāvanna southward.10 Sāvan na's first inscriptions in the Tamil country is in Ponnēri (north-eastern boundary of the Chingleput district) dated 1359.10a Vīra Sāvanna must have come into clash with the Sambuvarāya ruler immediately after the date of this inscription and an inscription of his at Sēndalai
(Tanjore) dated 1352-53 suggests that the struggle with the Sambuvarāya must have been finished before
8. A.R.E., 357 of 1928-29; 503 of 1906; 500 of 1906; 8 of 1899; 350 of 1927-28; 213 of 1912; 240 of 1912; 504 of 1906; 523 of 1919; 188 of 1903 (this list is almost exhaustive).
9. A.R.E., 357 of 1928-29 from Tiruppalaivanam-Ponnēri Taluk Chingleput Dt. dated 1272 Saka (1350) A.D.
10. A suggestion is made that Kampana came to Tiruvannamalai on a pilgrimage and he constructed a long outer wall to the temple. (Cf. Abidhānachintāmani). But the meeting of Kampaņa andVīra Savanna in the Tamil country appears to us to be something more than a mere coincidence.
 10a. A.R.E., 357 of 1928-29.
 gleput Dt. datenot1928-29 fren:
 28
 MADHURAVIJAY AM
1352. The Tiruvannāmalai inscription of Kampa dated 1352 also confirms this.
   Vira Sāvanna seems to have played the most im portant part in this preliminary campaign against the Sambuvarāya undertaken by about 1350-51. Vira Sāvanna's general Sāluva Mangu distinguished himself in this campaign as his title Sambuvarāyasthāpanā cārya should indicate. 11
   Kampana might or might not have actually taken part in the first campaign. It is likely he sent in his reinforcemenis and after the subjugation of the Sam buvarāya territory he stayed in Tiruvannāmalai the temporary capital of the Hoysala ruler Vira Ballāla III for a short time. Vira Sāvanna, after defeating the Sambuvarāya, reinstated him in his position evidently on his recognising Vijayanagar overlordship. 12
   We do not have inscriptions of Kampana in the Tamil country for some years after 1352 while we have inscriptions of Vira Sāvanna during this period. We may, therefore, conclude that Kampaņa returned to Mulbagal after the end of the first campaign leaving the Tamil country under Sāvanna's control.13
11. This title is not only mentioned in some literary works (Ref. the section of Saluva Mangu in this essay) but also in an inscription coming from Villiyanur (A.R.E., 1936-37, p. 80).
12. Kampana must have started early enough from Mulbagal, say about 1350 to direct the operations. The whole affair (viz. the subju gation of the Sambuyarāya) must have ended before 1352 and the Tiruvannāmalai inscription of Kampana must have been cut only after the end of the victory.
 There are two records of 'Sāvanna dēva Mahāraja' at Villiyanallur MARE. 195 and 196 of 1936-37) which refer to Sāvanna as Sambuva nāvasthāpanācārya. These are among the very last records of Sāvanna.
13. Cf. Madhurāvijayam. Reference is made to Kampana's start ing from the Vijayanagar capital on his final campaign the Sambuva rāya.
 122047
 29
 INTRODUCTION References to the fact that the Vijayanagar prince, reinstated the Sambuvarāya in his position are found in literary sources and also inscriptions. The Jaimini Bhāratam which in its introductory verses gives an ac count of the deeds of Mangu says explicitly : He established the Sambuvarāya in his kingdom and was distinguished by the title Samparāyasthāpanācārya or the establisher of Champa. The Sāluvābhyudayam states: "He then overcame the Sambuvarāya in battle whom he reinstated in his kingdom.” An inscription from Villivanallūr refers to the general's title assumed after the defeat of the Sambuvarāya.14
 Sāvanna Udaiyār seems to have actually set up his rule over the Tondaimandalam territory, possibly, as the overlord of Rājanārāyana. An inscription of his found in Tiruvorriyūr, dated 1354-55 refers to the act of negligence on the part of forty eight Agambadiyārs who were punished by Sāvanna.15 These Agambadiyārs were doing policing work for a long time. During Sāvanna's rule, they neglected their duty with the re sult that crimes increased. Perhaps by neglecting their duty these Agambadiyārs wanted to mark their protest against the foreign rule. For the same inscrip tion tells us that they had done their duty previously satisfactorily, without proving refractory. Disturbances
 • 14. Already referred to.
15. This record gives interesting information. The Agambadiyārs of Paduvūr “though they had long lived in that place and had been discharging the duties of kāval (police) many dacoities and distur bances had occurred in the village and that consequently the particu lar Agambadiyārs—about 48 in number—had either to be punished or otherwise corrected.” This incidentally throws light on the respon sibility of the police officers during that period. The practice of punish ing police officers for undetected thefts (and other crimes) is not uncommon in the history of South India. Cf. A.R.E., 240 of 1912.
 015:57 i all!
 way
 "?
 30
 MADHURĀ VIJAYA M similar to this seem to have characterised the Vijaya nagar rule. Another inscription bears evidence to this.16 It says that the images of Nāyanmārs in the Tirukkārīswara temple were desecrated during the period of confusion in the days of Sāvanna and these images had to be reconsecrated in 1367 by Kampana. All these suggest that while the Vijaya nagar overlordship had been accepted by Rājanārāyana by about 1352 the subjects of Rājanārāyana did not leave the conqueror in peace.
2. KAMPANA'S INVASION AND CONQUEST Inscriptions and other sources are silent on the circumstances leading to the second and the final in vasion of the Tondaimandalam region by Vijayanagar. The 'disturbances' during Sāvanna's rule caused by the people of Tondaimandalam might have suggested the unwisdom of the overlord and his vassal ruling side bv side. The vassal was the beloved of the subjects whilc the overlord was only tolerated on account of his superior strength. To remove the danger of a possible surprise rising against the overlord, a total destruction of the vassal's rule might have suggested itself to the Vijayanagar prince. Or could it be that he feared an alliance between the Sambuvarāya and the Sultan of Madhurai? Even if there were no basis for this doubt the destruction of the Sambuvarāya rule in Tondaimanda lam might have been considered a necessary prelude to the invasion of Madhurai; for there was no depending on the ruler of Tondaimandalam when such a mighty task, likely to yield the best results if completed success fully, was undertaken. So by way of abundant pre
16. Cf. 1.R.E., 110 of 1921,
 INTRODUCTION caution, Kampaņa might have wiped out the indepen- : dent kingdom of the Sambuvarāya before making his historic march on Madhurai. The fact that he under took the Ivíadhurai campaign only a decade later (i.e. in 1371) suggests that he took time to stabilise himself in the conquered territory and did his best to endear himself to his new subjects.17 Inscriptions and the Madhurāvijayam refer to a large scale remission of taxes during this period and also to various acts of philanthro pic characier." He conferred high honours, titles and privileges on the leading men in the conquered territory to win their co-operaiion and support.19 All these perhaps enabled him to get the whole-hearted support of his new subjects which would be impossible if the Sambuvarāva rule had been allowed to continue.
 This invasion must have taken place only after 1359, the last regnal year of Rājanārāyana, but before 1363, for by that time, as an inscription denotes, it was a fait accompli.20 Only one inscription mentions the name of the Sambuvarāya ruler whom Kampana defeated and it says that it was venrumankondān. Obviously it was not the father of Rajanārāyana Sambuvarāya, but his son, whom we have referred to earlier as Venrumaņkondan II.21 This Venruman
17. The Madhurāvijayam: Bukka advised his son Kampa first to consolidate his position in Tondaimandalam by ruling with due regard to the wishes of the people as the lord of wealth does in the city of Alaka.” The interesting point here is he makes these suggestions so that, “it would be easy for you to break the power of the Turushka” (Canto III).
18. Cf. S. Thiruvenkatachari Kampana as viceroy of Vijayanagar. 19. Ibid., (Proceedings of the Indian History Congress, 1946). 20. A.R.E., 267 of 1919.
21. A.R.E., 267 of 1919 dated Saka 1285–1363 states that Gandar güli Māraya Nāyaka vanquished Venrumaņkondān.32
 MADHURĀVIJAY AM kondān might have, in all probability, provoked the Vijayanagar prince even during the life-time of Rāja nārāvana. That we have no record of the successor of Rājanārāyana clearly indicates that he was not allowed to rule over his father's kingdom for any length of time, but was opposed, overthrown, and slain at his acces sion.
 As we have already stated, Kampaņa returned to his seat of Viceroyalty (Mulbagal) soon after finishing his work in the Tamil country in 1352, and spent the period between 1353 and 1359 there. This is suggested not only by the total absence of his inscriptions in the Tamil country, but also by an explicit statement in the Madhurāvijayam.22 According to it Kampana stayed with his father for sometime, took his advice and then went and stayed at Mulbagal, biding his time. The news about the death of Rājanārāyana and the state of affairs existing in the Tamil country would have been com municated by Savanna who was closely watching
 events in the Tondaimandalam region as its overlord.
 We do not know the exact date on which Kampana started on his campaign. In all probability it must have been soon after Rājanārāyana's death, which must have taken place sometime about 1362. Kampaņa started with a large force consisting of “more than a hundred troops of formidable-looking elephants, war-steeds faster than wind and foot-soldiers in proper dress”. 23 He placed Māraya Nāyaka at the command. Starting from the capital of Vijayanagar he crossed the Karnata province in five or six days and reached the city of
22. madhurāvijayam: Canto III. 23. Madhurāvijayam: Canto IV.
 INTRODUCTION Kanțakānana (Mulbāgal-or-Mul Vāi). He spent some days in that city biding his time to march against the Sambuvarāya ruler.24 Starting on an auspicious day, he reached the enemy country by stages. He first halted at Virinçipuram for sometime and when the hour for striking arrived, he dashed on the Sambuvarāya capital, Kānçi, and laid siege to it. A fierce battle followed between the Vijayanagar forces and the 'dramila' forces. The dramila forces were put to rout by the superior forces of Vijayanagar. "A large number of the Tamil soldiers threw away their weapons in their flight." The Sambuvarāya himself ran away to his Padaividu fortress and took refuge in it. Kampaņa and his forces stayed at Kānci for sometime, perhaps to pre pare themselves for the final attack. Then they started to attack the impregnable Rājagambhīranmalai. They succeeded in scaling the walls of the fort and reached the heights of the hill. The entire forces of the Sambuvarāya on the hill were blocked up and they suffered seriously at the hands of the Vijayanagar troops. The inscriptions credit Māraya Nāvaka with having destroyed the formidable enemy (Aliyā Aran) while the Madhurāvijayam refers to a duel fought between Kampana and the Sambuvarāya in which the latter lost his life.25
 After the destruction of the Sambuvarāya, the whole of Tondaimandalam was annexed to the Mulba gal Viceroyalty of Vijayanagar. Kānçi became the secondary capital for the Mulbagal Governor. The Madhurāvijayam concludes the account of the Vijaya
24. 25.
Ibid. A.R.E., 255 of 1934-35 also 267 of 1919,
34
MADHU PAVIJAYAM nagar victory thus : "After his (Kampaņa's) victory, he established himself at Kānçi and ruled the Tundīra (Tondaimandalam) kingdom protecting it from anarchy. From that great city of Maratakanagara he ruled the earth peacefully and well”. 26 An inscrip tion corroborates the poet thus: “Kampaņa Udaiyar became permanent on the throne after taking possession of Rājagambhirarājya”.??
26. Madhurāvijayam: Canto IV end and Canto V, commencement. There is absolutely no need for any doubt regarding the identification of Maratakanagara. 'Maratakanagara' and 'Kanci' have been used
 alternative names in the kavya. Also see Dr. N. Venkataramanavva: Early Muslim Expansion in South India, page 63.
27. A.R.E., 18 of 1899.
 V. THE CONQUEST OF MADHURAI 1. THE POLITICAL CONDITION PRECEDING THE CONQUEST
 Among the territories that suffered the worst rapine and plunder was Ma'bar. According to Khusrau’ Ma’bar lay within that distance from Delhi which could be reached after a normal journey of twelve months. As Khusrau says, the Muslim arrows had never reached that distant land”. As regards the identity of ĪMa’bar there is no doubt. The region of the Coroman dal east of Peninsular India might be said to corres pond roughly to what was known to Arab geographers as Ma'bar. The author of Taquivim ul-Buldān quoted by Al-Qalquashandi (Subh ul-A-sha) (Ed. by Otto Spies) says that Ma'bar "lies to the east of Kaulam (possibly Kollam or Quilon at three or four days journey in a southerly direction”). Ibn Sa'ib quoted by the same source says, “it is well-known and muslin is exported from there; its washermen are proverbial" What was the condition of Ma'bar at that time ?
 The Pāndyas who had taken the sovereignty of the South from the Cõlas were ruling with Madhurai as their capital and Bihr dhal or Vira Dhāvalpattanam as a sort of a secondary capital. The empire had, probably as a result of a dynastic feud, come under the rule of more than one king. Marco Polo testifies to the plural monarchy in Ma'bar. Epigraphical evidence lends con firmation to this position just on the eve of Malik
1. Khazā'n-Futuh.
2. Otto Spies: An Arab account of India in the 14th century, (page 38).
36
MADHURAVIJAY AM
Kafur's invasion. Dr. Venkataramanyya is of the view, which is tenable, that "each of these five princes seems to have held independent sway over some part of the empire, though the senior most or the most powerful of them was recognised as the supreme head of the state. He alone was most probably crowned; and on him devolved the right of directing the general policy of the empire”
Troubles set in when a war of succession started in the Pandyan Kingdom. Māravarman Kulasēkhara had two sons, Sundara and Vira, the former born of his queen and the latter born of a concubine. Kulasēkhara nominated Vira Pāndya to be his successor as he dis played great talents and remarkable shrewdness. Sundara Pāndya in great fury assassinated his father and crowned himself king. Vira Pāndya the heir designate met his half-brother in a battle near Madhurai and though he was not successful in the beginning, ultimately managed to drive away Sundara Pandya and seized the throne.
According to Wassaf, “Sunder Pandi, trembling and alarmed, fled from his native country and took refuge under the protection of Ala-ud-din of Delhi and Tira Pandi (Vīra Pāndya) become firmly established in his hereditary kingdom”. 4 This story is not easily acceptable as the event is placed in the middle of June 1310. Prof. Nilakanta Sastri rightly doubts its veracity because there are inscriptions of Kulasēkhara dated in his forty-fourth regnal year which commenced only in
3. Dr. N. Venkataramanayya: Early Muslim Expansion in South India.
4. Wassaf.
37
INTRODUCTION the middle of A.D. 1311.5 "It is very unlikely that re- . cords continued to be dated in the regnal years of a monarch who had died at his son's hands till more than a year after the event and that too near the capital of the kingdom”. Again while Amir Khusrau refers to the enmity between the two brothers (“the two Rais of Ma'bar, Bir Pāndya and Sundar Pāndya”) he does not mention Sundara's taking asylum in Delhi. But on the authority of Wassaf, most of the historians who have written on Malik Kafur's South Indian raids, say that it was Sundara Pāndya's treachery to vent a private wrath against his rival Vira Pandya that brought the Mussalman invader to the distant South. Even Wassaf does not connect the alleged flight of Sundara Pāndya to Delhi with the raids of Malik Kafur. There fore we will not be wrong in taking the raid of Malik Kafur as being timed at an opportune moment and that the Muslim invader was interested neither in Sundara Pāndya nor Vira Pāndya but in the fabulous wealth that belonged to both.
After a halt in the Yādava capital of Dēvagiri dur ing which Malik Kafur obtained from Rāmadēva (the Rāyi-Rāyan) all the materials needed for the Southern campaigns, the Malik started on his campaign guided in his route by one Paraşurām Daļavāi a deputy of Rāmadēva who had been instructed to lead the Muslim invader safe out of the Yadava territory. Dr. Venkata ramanayya thinks that the Yādava ruler who had been nurturing a deep grievance against the Hoysala Vira Ballāla III gave all possible assistance to Malik Kafur
5. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri: The Pandyan Kingdom.
38
MAD HURĂVIJAY AM
SW
in his campaign against Dwārasamudra. But, while such a view is not wholly untenable, there being noth ing to the contrary in the available sources, it will not be fair to question the conduct of the Yādava king by suggesting that he betrayed a fellow-Hindu ruler to avenge former wrongs on the part of the Höysala. The Yādava king was helpless when the Malik led his incredibly strong army into Dēvagiri and demanded help, not as an ally, but as a bully, on the point of the sword. Dr. Venkataramanayya himself refers to the fact of Malik Kafur having brought a "formidable force' with superior weapons. Naturally the same fear that later made Vīra Ballāla meekly submit to the mis deeds of the Malik made Rāmadēva offer all the help that the invader needed in his onward march against Dwārasamudra and Ma'bar.
Malik Kafur raided Dwārasamudra when Vira Ballāla III was absent at Ma’bar trying to capitalise the situation that had arisen as a result of the quarrels between Sundara Pandya and Vira Pandya. As Dr. Venkataramanayya thinks, Vira Ballāla must have considered the outbreak of civil dissensions in the Pāndyan kingdom, "a favourable opportunity for re gaining what his uncle and grandfather had lost”. Malik Kafur entered Dwārasumudra in February 1311 after doing great havoc en route. Vira Ballāla who had to hurry back from the Tamil country did not put forth any stout resistance to the Muslim invader because he knew that his military strength was nothing
a
Dr N Venkataramanayya: Early Muslim Expansion in South India: (M. U. Historical Series No. 17) Chap. on Alauddin Khilji. The
nd author has shown that the invasion of the Malik had no poli. tical significance..
39
SET
INTRODUCTION before that of Malik Kafur. He sued for peace and accepting humiliating conditions from the Malik, he agreed to be an ally of the invader in the latter's invasion of Ma'bar.
Malik Kafur's forces reached the frontiers of Ma'bar on the ides of March, 1311. Vira Pāndya, unlike Ramadeva and Vira Ballāla, preferred to give fight to the Muslims rather than meekly submit to them. He put all his strength into the fight and when the reck less invaders advanced, Vīra Pandya decided to flee for safety, and from Bir Dhul, where he was encamped he escaped, much to the consternation and chagrin of the avengeful Malik. As soon as Malik Naib discovered that he had been outwitted by Vīra Pāndya, he resolved to go to Kannanūr and proceeded with a regiment to Kannanūr. But Vira Pāndya gave the slip here also. Thus it was a regular game of hide and seek between Vira Pāndya and Malik Kafur. It was a great tragedy, which however could not be helped, that Baliāla had to play "the faithful ally”, to the marauding forces. After vain pursuits, Malik Kafur gave up the idea of capturing Vīra Pāņdya but turned his attention on the primary object of his raid, viz., plunder. From Kanna nūr he proceeded to Kānçipuram and laid waste the tem ples found in that great city. After plundering the tem ples, the Malik went back with his army to Bhir Dhul where he had originally struck camp. From Bhir Dhul his idea was to make a surprise attack on the Pāndyan capital where Sundara Pāndya was in authority. Sun dara Pāndya was forewarned; and by way of abundant caution he had left the city with his household, leaving a couple of temple-elephants in the city. The Malik's assault on Madhurai therefore proved a first rate mis
40
MADHURĀVIJAY AM
calculation. All that he could do was to set fire to the temple. Madhurai appeared to him to be too distant and unsafe a place for any lengthy halt. So he had to be more on the defensive in Madhurai. The Pandyan princes forgot their private quarrels at this hour of danger and under the leadership of Vikrama Pāndya launched an attack on the invading Muslims. This time Malik Kafur sustained a crushing defeat and had to beat a hasty retreat. But by now he had accumulated in his Southern raids a fabulous booty and he carried it safe to Delhi. In recognition of the loyal help that Ballāla ITT rendered to Malik Kafur, Alauddin decorat ed the Hoysala ruler's son at a special Durbar and presented him with the usual robes of honour.
Not a small number of historians have exaggerated the significance of the raids of Malik Kafur. The Tarikh-i-Firoz-Shahi mentions a larger booty than that mentioned by the Tarikh-i-Alai quoted above:? The in vasion of Malik Kafur had of course no political significance but as a brilliant military raid it had caused as much havoc as one could imagine.
