+++
title = "1"

+++
Slökās 1 to 16: Gangā Dēvī's obeisance to the poets who influenced her.

1. May the elephant-faced God, who, like the divine Kalpavrksa fulfils ihe desires of those that sur render to His Grace, be propitious to the good.  
2. For the sake of wisdom, I prayerfully approach God Śiva and His Spouse, who embody the light of Universal Consciousness and who bear the form of the Creator's model for making man and woman.  
3. I make obeisance to Goddess Saraswati who lives in the lotus-like mouths of great poets, as a Sārika bird in a jewelled cage and who acts like moon light on the ocean of Universal Intelligence.  
4. I bow to Guru Kriyāśakti, unparalleled in wisdom and resplendent with auspiciousness like another Triloçana (Śiva) with Sarvamangalā (Pārvati) shining (by his side).  
5. May the sage Vālmiki, who is (as it were) the first foot set on this earth by poesy, bring cheerfulness to the minds of the virtuous.  
6. Just as there is delicious juice in every joint of red sugar-cane, there is sweet essence in every sec tion of Vyāsä's string of expressions (the Mahābhārata)
   which imparts immediate enjoyment to men of good taste.
   even no
7. Who are the poets that do not play the role of a slave to Kālidāsa? For even now those that are, live by his ideas.  
3. How could others comprehend the eloquence of Bhatta Bāna, which captivates like the musical sound of the viņā played by Saraswati's own hand?  
9. Just as the garland of vakula flowers yields its sweet fragrance oniy when pressed, so too, the language of Bhāravi discloses its excellence and gives delight to the learned only if pondered upon.  
10. The flourish of expressions of Açārya Dandin, drunk (as it were) with the wealth of nectar, shines like the fashionable precious stone-mirror of the Creator's Spouse.  
11. I fancy that Bhavabhūti's compositions must be some species of Kāmadhēnu; for they produce in the ears of the learned a pleasure akin to the drinking of ambrosia.  
12. Whom would the expressions of the poet of KarnāmRta fail to delight--expressions which are an ocean of honey flowing from the flower clusters of the mandāra tree?  
13. Even as the thirsty cāköra birds love to drink the mai's of the moon, poets find immense relish in the composition of Kavi Tikkayya.  
14. Breathes there the man of learning who will not be jealous of the poet Agastya whose wealth of learning is demonstrated by the production of as many as seventyfour poetic compositions?
15. We respectfully greet the great poet Gangādhara as a second Vyāsa, in that he has made the story of the Bhārata actually seen by the device of dramatization.  
16. May the lord of poets, Visvanātha, flourish long; for it is by his grace, even in individuals like my self, has dawned a sense of omniscience.  

Shlokās 17 to 24: Ganga Dēvi un-literary criticism.

17. There is sense in some, idea in some, and sen timent in some; but nowhere is found a worl: where a!! these exist together.  
18. Even as a single salt particle from an oyster shell spoils the liquid essence of black sandal, so too, even the smallest flaw found in a poetic work renders it censurable.  
19. Just as an ugly woman, though virtuous, is not pleasing to her husband, a faultless poetic compo sition, if devoid of qualities (fineness), does not satisfy the man of learning.  
20. A vile man searches for faults in a poetic composition, in disregard of its merits, even as the crow shows a preference to the nimba (fruit) without caring for the mango in the forest.  
21. How long can a plagiarist dally with poesy obtained by stealing? For shortlived is the radiance of artificial colouring in a fictitious stone.
22. Logicians, there are many; grammarians—they abound in thousands; but scarcely can be found poets who are charming by reason of their beautiful songs.  
23. What is there that the composition of a poet does not yield? It promotes fame, serves for wealth, destroys baseness and awakens delight.  
24. A connoisseur of learning needs no invitation to listen to good poetry. Who urges the bee to taste the sweetness of honey?  

Slokas 25 to 42: The greatness of Bukka, the father of Kampaņa, is described.

25. Oh learned men, please listen, therefore, to this poem of mine dealing with the history of king Kampaņa, going by the famous title of the Conquest of Madhurā (Madhurā Vijayam).  
26. There was a famous king called Bukka who was the younger brother of Harihara and whose commands were borne on their heads by all the neighbouring vassals.  
27. Like Sēșa among serpents, Himavān among mountains, and Visņu among gods, he occupied the first place among the lords of the earth.
28. Severer than the sun and pleasanter than the moon was he. In depth he excelled the ocean, and in firmness, the mountain Sumēru.  
29. With discernment alone for his minister, and the bow alone for his army, he counted on his arms as his only ally in the heart of battle.  
30. He demonstrated the presence of the (four) guardian deities of the universe even on this earth: Indra by being victorious, Varuna by being the over lord of the waters, Kubēra by giving away wealth and Yama by being impartial.  
31. His immense fame displayed its existence among his subjects as sandal paste on their chests, as pearl ear-rings in their ears, and camphor powder on their faces.  
32. By (the might of) his arm which confounded the army generals of his enemies, fame was won by him, even as nectar (by the gods) by using the Manthara mountain with which was churned the boundless lord of the rivers (viz., ocean).  
33. His fame, as a person of delightful qualities, spread so envelopingly that it appeared like a coverlet of white silk on the oval shape of the universe.  
34. The sword wielded by his hand, terrible as it looked, feasting on the life-breath of his royal opponents, begot glory, even as a ferocious serpent feeding on air produces its cover of slough.  
35. His right hand which to all appearance seemed to be drawing the sword was in fact practising the art of drawing, by her braided hair, the goddess of prosperity of his adversaries.  
36. Having, after a long time, come to him who was ever wakeful in protecting this universe, Goddess Lakşmi never again remembered Vișnu who was in sensible, wrapped up in yogic sleep.  
37. The tree of Dharma which had withered away by the scorching heat of this Kali age sprouted again by the water that flowed (from his hands) while making gifts of charity.  
38. His very enemy-kings who bore on their head scars caused by rubbing against his foot-rest stood on all quarters as so many pillars of his triumph.  
39. The reputations of his adversaries, as if they were enveloped by rows of flames of the fire of his prowess, looked dark in appearance.  
40. Chained in the grounds of his halls, his victorious elephants looked like clouds, imprisoned, be cause they stood in the way of his triumphal expeditions.  
41. The (cloud of) dust raised by the hoofs of his war-horses made the sun apprehensive of an unexpectedly sudden approach of Rāhu.  
42. By the side of his prosperity, the prosperity of Kubēra or Indra looked insignificant; and far remote became the question of any comparison between the fortunes of personages like Duryodhana and him.  

Shlokas 43 to 66: The City of Vijayanagar.  
43. He who augmented his riches by conquest, had the famous Vijayanagara for his capital city. That city won the approbation of knowing men, as Indra's Amarāvati, won that of the gods.  
44. As if in rivalry with the heavenly Ganges that flowed round the borders of swargaloka, the river Tungabhadra encircled the city as a formidable moat.  
45. The city was also surrounded by ramparts on all sides which were high as the Cakrāçala mountains; and it had the beauty of a water-trench round the creeper Lakşmi and looked like the navel of goddess Earth.  
46. Lofty and gem-set towers like the peaks of the Sumēru emitting rainbow colours adorned the city.  
47. The city was also surrounded by pleasure groves which looked like abodes of Spring and which were full of flowering trees like campaka, asőka, nāga and kēsara.  
48. The pleasure-hillocks in the city were fre quented by the musk deer that sought the shade of the plantains and karpūra plants in them. These hillocks looked like the veritable hiding places of the God of Love.  
49. The city had sporting-lakes, fragrant with the smell of lotuses. Those lakes had gem-set steps and were always inhabited by beautiful swans.  
50. The elevated portions of the city had high built palaces which were white like the clouds of autumn. One wondered if they were so many shapes which the fame of the king's conquest of world-cities itself had taken.  
51. The city looked like the stage set for flowering female beauty to display its charms; or it may even be pictured as the mark of fashion and loveliness adorning the forehead of the lady known as Earth's Southern Quarter.  
52. The city was full of virtuous Brāhmans, and armies of musicians ever strode its expansive grounds. Thus, like the full-moon night, or the world of celestial bards, serenity and music reigned unceasingly all round.  
53. Bhujangas, or youths of fashion, made that city their favourite haunt, even as bhujangas, or serpents, make the crown of Śiva their chosen abode. Good-hearted people in large numbers loved to wander in its precincts like gods in the regions of the Sumēru.  
54. The city was the play-ground of all good fortune. Prosperity in all its aspects delighted to live in its saloons. The city looked like a garland of precious stones on the shores of the sea of virtue.  
55. The disc of the sun caught in the heights of the city's palaces produced on the on-lookers the illu sion of a golden jar.  
56. The damsels playing on the grounds of the top floor of the city's mansions often laid their hands on the rounded body of the moon, mistaking it for their play-ball of pearls.  
57. Hearing the sound of the drum accompanying the music played in the city's palaces, the peacock began to dance even in the absence of any appropriate 'occa sion (viz., the appearance of a thunder-cloud).  
58. The clouds that hung about the sides of the city's palaces with the colour of padmarāga gems reflect ed in them, always looked brown like evening clouds.  
59. The clouds of smoke that rushed through the crevices in the buildings of the city at the evening-time appeared like darkness effecting its escape afraid of be ing caught in the effulgence of approaching lamp-light inside.
60. As the lustre of the gems with which the steps were paved in the lakes always drove darkness away, the cakravāka birds were not separated even at night fall.  
61. The moonas if ashamed by reason of the shin ing beauty marking the lotus-like faces of the lovely women in the city, ever wore a mourning black on her body known as kalanka.  
62. The god of love never thought of resorting to his flower-arrows to effect his conquests in the face of the lovely glances shot from the eyes of beautiful women there to subdue the hearts of youth.  
63. As if to take their lessons in graceful walking the swans ever sought the company of women there, attracted by the sweet jingling of their foot-ornaments.  
64. The blooming breasts of the maidens of the city were beautifully set off by their slender waists even as thick clouds in the void above.  
65. There was no hardness there in the city ex cept in the breasts of beautiful damsels, nor crooked ness except in their curly locks, nor thinness except in their waists.  
66. Pampā was the branch city of Vijaya. Many a Kubēra (lords of wealth) were there so much so that God Virūpākṣa (Śiva) who was enshrined there never spent a thought about his original home at Alaka.

Slökās 67 to 75: Bukka as king. Of special interest is the mention of Devīyi, the queen of Bukka.

67. Installed in that city, he, of undiminished prowess, ruled over the earth even as Indra ruled the heavenly regions from his seat in Amarāvati.  
68. By contemplating on his prosperity that was at the service of friends, and his politics that was wide and comprehensive, his subjects imagined that Manu himself had in him his second birth.  
69. Though impartial to all the three puruşārtas dharma, artha and kāma—the king, who was the idol of all virtuous people, had a special regard for dharma, even as Vişnu, the Lord of all, has for satva, among his three guņas--satva, rajas and tamas.  
70. His hand gave freely, his ear heard the Sāstras well, his head was always crowned with the sandals of Lord Siva. The sense of decorative fineness that he thereby evinced became the means of his achieving his desire to get and keep prosperity.  
71. The kings that ruled over the territories of which the mountains of Vindhya, Malaya, Astha and Rõhana were the four boundaries paid homage to him and those that were enemies shook with fear.  
72. Always awake at his post of guarding the kingdom that came to him from his ancestors in an unbroken line of succession, the king enjoyed the immense pleasures befitting his royal rank yet with complete detachment.
73. Like Lakşmi to Nārāyana and Pārvati to Sankara, queen Devāyi was to the king the chosen consort.  
74. Though the king had other wives also, she alone became the object of his love and regard, even as Rõhiņi to the moon among celestial luminaries.  
75. The brave king who was pleasing like the full moon to the eyes of the people of Karnāța dwelt along at the city of Vijaya and enjoyed the delights of his youth with her who was his heart's beloved. 
    
Thus ends the first canto of Virakamparāya çaritam called Madhurāvijayam, composed by Sri Gangā Dēvi.
Obeisance to Goddess Minākşi !
