+++
title = "2"

+++
Slökäs 1 to 13: Queen Devāyi conceives. Her longings during pregnancy are described.
1. The queen conceived by the king and bore in her womb, the seed of royal race, as the cosmic waters held in them the tējas virile of Brahma with which the three worlds were created.  
2. The queen put aside her jewels. Her face was somewhat pale like the sara reed and her form unusually slender. She shone like a river in autumn with lotuses gone and with the globe of the moon reflected on its watery surface.  
3. She who was the beloved consort of the lord of this earth, indulged in tasting particles of it as if to teach the responsibility of earth-sway to the infant in her womb.  
4. The very nature of her longings in her pregnancy which always took a daring turn suggested that her would-be son would be wedded to heroic accomplishments.  
5. Without caring for the Tungabhadra which flowed nearby and which was easily fordable, she desir ed to sport in the Tāmraparņi in company with her army of elephants that would raise waves in its waters (while they submerged with their huge bodies).  
6. Though she was physically unable to walk as far as the pleasure-hill where the deer were quietly  
MADHURAVIJAY AM
grazing, she, in her mental flights, was on the tops of the Malāya mountain inhabited by (ferocious) lions.
7. She heard of Vişnu's miraculous exploits underneath the earth and wanted to imitate Him .... (slöka imperfect).  
8. She laughed at Śiva's valour in reducing Tripura aided by all such paraphernalia as the Earth for the chariot, Brahma for the charioteer, Sesa for the bowstring, the mountain for the bow and Hari for the arrow.  
9. As time advanced, the limbs of her body began to put on flesh; he face regained its sweet and lazy eye-looks; her beily began to show its folds distinctly; and this change in his beloved filled the king withi delight.  
10. The auspicious line of hair that was on her abdomen looked like a black serpent on guard in order to protect the infant within.  
11. Her breasts, with black nipples, surpassed in their attractiveness the çakravāka couple with a bit of blue utpala flower in their beaks.  
12. The lord of earth regarded her being in an interesting condition, as if she were a rain-cloud full of water within, a pearl oyster with pearl inside and night time foreshadowing the rise of the moon.  
13. The king who was as prosperous as Indra and who was ever bent on the amelioration of his subjects, celebrated the ceremony of pumsavana as ordered by  
14
M ADHURĀ VIJAY A M
his preceptor, at the appointed time, on a scale befitting his royal rank.

Shlokas 14 to 42: The birth of Kampaņa, the hero of the poem. The birth of the other two sons of Bukka, Kampaņa and Sangama, is also mentioned.  
14. Then on an auspicious day, at the hour pro nounced most auspicious by astrologers, the queen presented her lord with a boy, as Goddess Pārvati bore to Śiva the child Subrahmanya.  
15. The quarters then shone with spotless lustre as if they had been newly washed by royal fame which was fit to be likened to the whiteness of milk that filled the milky ocean.  
16. Cool breeze scented with the flower-dusts from heavenly trees began to blow gently as if afraid of the new-born infant who was soon to attain the mastery of his earth.  
17. The god of fire seemed to dance with joy, describing auspicious circles with his bright ends; and this betokened that fruitful sacrifices would soon be performed all over the southern countries in abundance.  
18. The kalpa vřksās by showering down flowers through clouds looked as if courting in advance the friendship of the royal child who was soon to excel them in the glory of giving.  
19. The wild elephants, with ichor flowing down their cheeks, trumpeted in joy, as if in contemplation of the destruction that awaited their enemies; the lions, at  
MADHURĀVIJAY A M
the hands of the royal baby who would soon grow up to be a daring hunter.
20. The horses also neighed with joy, tearing the ground with their large hoofs, perhaps thinking, that they would soon be mounted upon by the child and a great glory awaited them in that role.  
21. Tumultuous rejoicings among the people of the city arose, with trumpets blowing and çāraṇas shouting auspicious words.  
22. The monarch of Kuntala wished to give away even himself bodily to those that bore the glad tidings of his son's birth,  
23. By his royal word of command the prisons were thrown open and prisoners were unchained and liberated as if to make room for future incumbents, viz., the turuskas.  
TOO
24. Duly bathed and clad in white silk, the king: after doling out immense riches as gifts to Brāmins, entered the lying-in room with a glad heart to see the face of his son.  
25. He saw the child lying on the lap of his slim featured queen like a swan youngling on the wavy-bed of the autumnal river.  
26 to 30. Rays of light, whitish as camphor dust, played on the child's form which subdued the lustre of the lamps burning in the lying-in-chamber. With his two reddish hands closed, the child looked as if already practising the art of holding within his grasp the god dess of prosperity of his enemies. His two gracefully shaped feet bore auspicious marks indicative of conch,
as
1
16
MADHURAVIJ A Y AM disc, umbrella, lotus, banner, and fish. His tiny fingers, reddish and soft as tender foliage, were also beautiful to look at. He bore the hairy sign of Śrīvatsa on his breast which suggested that he was an avatāra of Vişnu, and, that unbroken prosperity would mark his life. His forehead was adorned with a circle of hair between the eye-brows. His eyes were large like the petals of blooming lotus. His nose was lofty; and a sweet smile played on his red lips. Altogether, the child's face was surpassingly beautiful.
31. Tears of joy, for a while, acted as a check on the steadfast look of his eyes that feasted on the cherubic form of the child.  
32. The king embraced the child with his eyes; and the excessive emotion in his mind burst out as manifest by horripulation.  
33. On an auspicious day, the jāta karman rites of the child were performed as directed by the priest, and the child grew in splendour like the god of fire that witnesses those rites.  
34. The king who always looked ahead named his child Kampana, as he clearly foresaw in his mind that, in proper time, the latter would become a matchless (warrior, and was sure to make his enemies in the field of battle quake with fear.  
35. Just as the sacrificer tends the fire with ghee offerings, and just as the cloud sustains the corn with rains, so too, the king had his child brought up by trustworthy nurses.  
36. He was overjoyed to hear the lisping words and to look at the tottering gaits of his child, who had  
MADHURAVIJAY AM
17 his lessons on talking and walking from his foster mother.
37. Like a swan that ever loves the touch of budding lotuses, the king was never satisfied with kis sing the fragrant mouth of his child with no teeth yet perceptible in it.  
38. The pleasurable feeling which the king had while embracing his cherub boy, was not to be matched by the contact of camphor, pearl, sandal-paste or moon beams.  
39. The king and the queen felt themselves bathed in an ocean of nectar as they enjoyed looking at their child crawling on his knees on the floor of the palace, with the small bells in his ornaments tinkling.  
40. Then, in course of time, the queen bore to the king two other sons called Kampana and Sangama who were like pārijāta and çintāmaại that sprang from the milky ocean.  
41. The prince (viz, Kampana), along with his two brothers, began to grow, day by day ; and people were in ecstasies when they looked at him as at the (waxing) moon.  
42. The king, with his three children, shone like Śiva with his three eyes, the moon, the sun and the fire; or like statesmanship, with its three unfailing aspects, Power, Daring and Counsel; or like life with its three ends, Virtue, Wealth and Enjoyment.  
