+++
title = "6"

+++

Shlokas 1 to 69: The water-sports of the Prince.  
1. Like Indra always attended by celestial nymphs, the king with his ladies moved to his pleasure garden which resembled Nandana, to gather flowers.  
2. The ladies followed the king as he began to move to the garden, with their jewelled girdles sound ing. The sight of it was like a line of humming bees moving in the wake of the southern gale.  
3. The path which the ladies took was lined with red lac-dye dripping from their feet, and it seemed as if a cover of tender leaves was being laid on the ground.  
4. The giances of ladies, radiating blue, white and red hues, seemed to line the sky with blue lilies, white lilies and red lotuses.  
5. The sounds of jewelled anklets of ladies, as they seli on the king's ears, produced the impression in his mind, that it might be the noise of the stringing of Cupid's bow.  
6. Mutual conversations held by the ladies, as they followed the king, were heard in varying notes of sweetness.  
7. "Oh ye beautiful friend, go slowly after the rest lest you injure your feet by treading on the pearls dropped down on the way from their broken garlands."  
8. “Don't you wake up, oh ye lotus-faced, the sleeping swans, with the sound of your jewelled anklets. If you do, they would crowd round your feet mistaking  
MADHU RĀVIJAY AM
49
the same for lotuses and thus cause obstruction to your speedy going.”
9. “Look you here, friend, this thirsty deer which eagerly approaches you mistaking the brilliance radiat ing from your finger-nails for water, will surely move away in shame, once the mistake is found out.”  
10. “You, moon-faced dear, move not a step lest you knock against the moon-stone wall. But the reflec tion of your lotus-like face has already entered it."  
11. "Oh, my foolish friend, why do you walk so slow? You don't seem to realise that your roguish lover will exploit this to court the company of other women. For, this pleasure-forest, darkish with such thick dust of fresh flowers, is eminently filted for secret meeting even in day time.  
12. "Oh friend, I know you walk very fast so that you may overtake your lover in order to look back and see his face. But you don't seeni to realise that women in their minds have the lover's face always in front of them!  
13. "I know you could not walk fast because of your burdensome breasts. But, friend, walk fast you must.” (Slökā incomplete).*  
57. The king splashed water on a lotus in the pleasure lake. And this made a lady cast on him angry looks of jealousy, the fringes of her eye-lashes wet with tears.  
58. As the king touched nicely the upper part of a lady's thigh underneath the water, she feigned fish  

Shlokas 14 to 56 missing.  
50
M ADHURAVIJAY A M bite and embraced her lover even when her companions were looking on.
59. Another lady, afraid of being struck with splashes of water, abruptly turned, her braid of hair falling in front. The king cast longing glances on it, as if it were Cupid's slab with his sword placed on it.  
60. The sheet of water first touched the feet, then the thighs, then the cloth, then the waist and then the breasts of beautiful ladies as they slowly descended it.  
61. À lady blinded the king by splashing water, as if in sport, against his eyes when the other ladies turned to look at the nail marks on the person of her rival.  
62. Sporting in the waters made the ladies look as if they had just had their sexual satisfaction. Their lips were colour-free, their eyes devoid of collyrium and their foreheads without their decorating mark. And such a sight pleased the king immensely.  
63. From the breasts of Kuntala ladies sandal paste was washed away; and the cover of lotus-dust which took its place effectively concealed all nail marks on them.  
64. The current of water floated away the wreaths that had dropped from the śrutis (ears) of ladies. Which man, however ignorant, (also cold) make friend ship of one who had fallen from the path of śruti (Vedic injunction)?  
65. Though their royal lover asked them to stop, his ladies had no mind to do so, as they were very much  
MADHURAVIJAY AM
51
attracted by the love of sport; and so they did not leave the pleasure lake though its water had completely washed away their decorative marks.
66. Then, at last, tired of sport, they came out; the king started (home) with them; he then resembled the Kalpaka Vỉkṣa moving from the milky ocean in company of water nymphs fatigued with the tossings in churning  
67. The king was delighted to look at his beloved ones as they emerged out of the lake, with nail marks on their persons distinctly visible, with their thighs revealed through the waving cover of wet clothing, and water particles dripping from their long braids of hair.  
68. King Kampaņa thought himself more fortu nate than even Cupid, as he feasted his eyes on the person of his ladies between tying their hair and wear ing fresh dress.  
69. Then, dressing maids put his royai garments on him, and he left his harem; and after offering due worship to Śiva, whose glory is sung by Vedas, attended to duties of state for the rest of the day.  
