+++
title = "7"

+++

Shlokas 1 to 50: Day and Night described. Gangā Dēvi's description of Night to her husband.  
1. Then the sun, as if afraid of the offence he had given to the queens by making lotuses imitate the beauty of their faces, sunk into the caverns of the western mountains.  
2. From there he submerged into the waters of the Western Ocean as if to replenish his heat from the submarine fire there-heat which had been spent in the day in making lotuses blossom.  
3. The ladies of Varuna's harem fancied the globe of the sun to be the golden ear-ring which the Goddess of Day had dropped down in her haste to depart.  
4. The cheeks of Varuna's ladies reddened with the rays of the setting sun; and this change of colour came to them (cheeks) even when no intoxicating wine had been drunk.  
en V
ine
5. The sun, getting drunk with the honey in the lotuses, abandoned ambara (meaning ‘sky' and 'appa rel') and in that state touched the western region revered as Varuna's queen. Who is there that is immune to the injurious influence of drinking?  
6. The sun at one stage seemed to be afflicted with the heat of separation from the eastern quarter; but now he was seen enjoying himself in company with the opposite quarter, his heat gone, on reaching her. The minds of lovers are certainly inscrutable!  

7. The lotus ponds with closed fowers of lotuses looked as if offering their prayer with folded hands for the return of the sun who had left them for another hemisphere.  
8. The ocean, with the folds of evening clouds reflected in the waves raised by the wind, looked as if putting up steps of gems for the sun to descend from the sky.  
9. The globe of the setting sun, as it touched its own reflection in the waves of the western ocean, raised in one's mind the idea of the Golden cymbals, for the evening dancer, Śiva.  
eve
10. Cakravāka couples with their pitiful looks at the setting sun, and with bits of lotus-stalk dropping down from their beaks, looked very miserable on the eve of their mutual separation at nightfall.  
11. A few streaks of light still lined the sky even after the sun had sunk in the ocean waters. These looked like the remnant branches of the tree of Day which the elephant Time had uprooted.  
12. The ocean, with the beams of the setting sun, reminded one of the time-honoured anecdote of its having been stained with the blood of Madhu and Kaitabha.  
13. The globe of the sun, with its lustre gone, rolled, scattered by the ocean waves. Sea-fishes licked it often and often, mistaking it for the broken remains of a fruit.  
14. Small remnants of light caused hundreds of dark shadows of trees to be cast on the ground. And these looked like the forces of darkness overpowering the army of the sun fleeing in fear.  
15. The sun, setting out on a journey at the end of the day, entrusted his paritāpa (heat, also distress) to be kept by the hearts of women separated from their lovers, and his brilliance to be safeguarded by herbs (that used to glow at night time.).  
16. Taking a warning as it were, from the fall on one khaga (the sun, also a bird) because of his over stepping Visnupāda (the feet of Vişnu, also sky), the other khagas (birds) quietly hid themselves in their nests in trees.  
17. Within closed petal-doors of lotuses which are considered as Lakşmi's dwelling houses, the black bees going round and round, humming, enacted the role of night-watchmen.  
18. The Goddess of Day, sealed, as it were, the closed lotuses with the lac of black-bees sitting close on their surface, with a view to guard the fragrance treasure of honey within.  
19. The evening twilight was fancied by people as the screen of the stage where the dancer Time, was about to act the part of Night having taken off his dis guise as Day.  
20. The same twilight raised the momentary vision of a red doublet worn by the region of Varuņa; one also fancied that it should have got its characteristic colour by coming into contact with the dust raised by the hoofs of the sun's horses as they trod on the red layers of the western mountains.
21. Red clouds travelled in the evening sky, and their colour was imitative of the hue of the red dye adorning the face of the Damsel, Night, who was about to set foot on the horizon.  
22. The reddish hues of twilight, as of tender leaves, began to show themselves in the western horizon like coral reefs revealed by the western ocean in the agitation caused by the rapid fall of the sun into its depth.  
23 to 25. Then darkness began to set in. now obscuring trees, now the sky, now the regions; and it gave rise to various fancies such as: that they were tender leaves of tamāla with which the regions deco rated their ears; or that they were musk-paste draw ings on the face of the lady called Night; or that they were smokes rising from the quenching of the sun's heated surface; or that they were black bees disguised as darkness filling the regions after leaving the closing lotuses, or the black waters of the Jumna rising up, tall as trees, when disturbed by Sri Krsna.
26. People's eyes suddenly lost their power (of seeing). It seemed as if the burning lamp of the sun was put out, and from the lamp-pot of sky, lamp-black was being scattered all round.  
27. The stars began to show themselves in the dark sky, and people fancied that God Śiva was letting go his elephant-skin clothing dotted with drops of blood (after his dance was over).  

28. The stars looked as if they were beads of perspiration appearing on the blue sky as a result of its suffering from the burning heat of the sun during the day.  
29. Time was certainly the ploughman; the stars were well-washed seeds of grain; the dark skies were fields rendered muddy, wherein those seeds were sown by him in order to raise the crop of moon-light. Such was the fancy in the mind of all.  
30. Fancy the horizon as a tree. Twilight was the tender shoot to appear first. Darkness was the full grown leaf. The regions were its branches wherein one saw the numberless buds of little stars.  
31. Girls went to meet their lovers at rendezvous. But friends forbade them by their very sighs; that were made aware by the fragrance of breath in the darkness.  
32. Lamps lit in houses, which were the children of mother night were tended with great care which took the form of oil-fed wicks. ('Snēha' means oil also, and dasa' wick).  
33. Lady Darkness decking her plait of hair with flowers of stars waited for a short time for her lover, the moon, smiling, as it were, with the blossoms of the white lily.  
34. Then a few rays of the moon, like glittering ocean-waves, were to be noticed in the eastern horizon.  
35. The eastern quarter, hiding the moon about to rise, with her pale appearance, looked like a woman big with child of whom she was about to be delivered.  
57 36. A portion of the reddish orb of the moon appeared on the eastern region like the mark on the forehead of a beautiful maiden whom that region (of Indra) might be imagined to incarnate.
37. The reddish globe of the rising moon looked like the victorious umbrella of Cupid made of red sandhyaka flowers.  
38. Just as a new king who after the departure of the powerful personality of an old monarch ministers consolation to the world by his gentle levies, so also, the moon, after the splenderous sun had disappeared, pleased the world with his cool pleasant rays.  
39. Then the dutiful king Kampaņa duly per formed the worship of sandhya, and afterwards, addressed his queen who was near and whom the world was delighted to call Gangā; thus:  
40. “Oh, my lotus-eyed dear, let this hour be honoured by your sweet description. This servant of yours eagerly waits to drink the nectar of your expres sion with his ears."  
41. Thus spoken to by her Lord, the queen slightly lowered her lotus-like face in bashfulness, and slowly began to give utterance to her charming words.  
42. “Oh, my dearest, see how pleasant is this hour and how propitious to Cupid, with fragrant breeze gently blowing and with the charming moon just rising.  
43. "The lord of night hugs the eastern region to his bosom in an ardent embrace, and with his nail-like rays unties her braid of hair which incarnates darkness.
44. Having got up the eastern mountain, the moon looks as if sucking darkness from the cup of sky, his rays acting as lotus stalks to suck through.*  
45. The moon who is the lord of miraculous herbs, practises alchemy, as it were, by transforming the ‘iron called darkness into the ‘silver' called moonlight, by subjecting the former to a fire-process called udaya rāga (redness of dawn).  
46. The damsel called the Eastern Region draws out her white silk of moonlight presented to her by Night from the conch-white box of moon-globe and dresses herself with it, and looks splendid.  
47. The moon embraces with his hands of rays the damsel of Eastern Region, and at the same time, also touches another called Kumudvati (bed of night lotuses). This shows, that lustful men ought not to be trusted.  
48. Though the moon touches incessantly with his rays, as with hands, the lotus clusters, the latter do not look up to him nor return his attentions. That proves how virtuous women are firm in their vow of chastity.  
49. The sun enters the moon every new-moon, and so, the latter is also endowed with the heating qua lity of the former. And this, he exhibits in the case of lovers in separation.  
50. The bee-black spot that is observed in the centre of the moon's globe is not the sign of deer as some suppose. But what it evidences is the applica tion of lamp-black which he had while being used as one of the wheels of Rudra's chariot at the time of Tri pura destruction.
* In Sanskrit, unlike in English, 'moon' is masculine.  
51. Or, you may even consider that spot blue as indra-nāla gem, as night herself who is his beloved lying there is love's repose.”  
Thus ends the seventh canto of Virakamparāya çaritam, called Madhurāvijayam composed by Gangā Dēvi.


The condition of the Tamil country after the Muslim Occupation.
... ... Verily has become the abode of tigers, true to its name. ... (incomplete).
Wa
In Srirangam the lord of serpents is seen warding off the tumbling debris of brick with his hood lest their fall disturb the sleep of yoga in which Hari is wrapped up there.
When I look at the state of the temples of other gods also, my distress knows no bounds. The foldings of their door are eaten up by wood worms. The arches over their inner sanctuaries are rent with wild growths of vegetation.
Those temples which were once resonant with the sounds of mridanga drums, are now echoing the fearful howls of jackals.
The river Kāvēri, uncurbed by proper bunds or dams, has become deflected very much from her time-honoured course, and flows in all sorts of wrong directions as if imitating the Turuskas in their actions.
The Brāhmin streets, where once the sacrifi cial smoke was ever seen rising, and the chanting of Vēdās always greeted the ears, now exhude the musty odour of meat, and resound with the lion-roars of drunken Turuşkas.
I very much lament for what has happened to the groves in Madhura. The cocoanut trees have all
M A DHURAVIJAY A M
61 been cut and in their place are to be seen rows of iron spikes with human skulls dangling at the points.
In the highways which were once charming with the sounds of anklets of beautiful women, are now heard ear-piercing noises of Brāhmins being dragged, bound in iron-fetters.
Webs worn by spiders have since taken the place of silk veils with which the dolls adorning the outer-towers of the city were once covered. Royal court-yards which were once cool with the spraying of ice-cold sandal, now distress me, wet as they are with the tears of Brāhmins taken as prisoners.
Screechings of owls in worri-out pleasure groves do not afflict me so much as the voice of parrots taught to speak Persian in the houses of Yavanas (Turuskas).
The waters of Tāmbraparni which were once white with sandal paste rubbed away from the breasts of charming girls are now flowing red with the blood of cows slaughtered by the miscreants.
Earth is no longer the producer of wealth. Nor does Indra give timely rains. The God of death takes his undue toll of what are left lives of undestroyed by the Yavanas.
I am very much distressed by looking at the tearful faces of Drāvidas, their lips parched by hot sighs, and their hair worn in utter disorder.
The Kali age deserves now deepest congratu lations for being at the zenith of its power; for, gone is sacred learning; hidden is refinement; hushed is the voice of Dharma; destroyed is discipline, and discounted is nobility of birth.

Having thus narrated the sickening career of the Yavanas, she (the strange woman that appeared before Kampaņa) by her wonderful power of magic caused a terrible-looking sword to appear.
The description of the sword presented to Kampaņa. The exhortation of the female Apparition to Kampaņa to rid Madhurai of the Muslim rule.
In its shining silver sheath and handle, it looked like a serpent that had recently sloughed. In its darkish brilliance it resembled the agaru paste that one might imagine on the person of Bhadrakāli whose advent marks the end of this universe. With the images of burning lamps reflected in its surface, it looked like a fresh cloud bright with lightening within it. This sword, efficacious in drawing tears of sorrow from the eyes of enemies' spouses, she placed before the king, as if it were the personification of the Prosperity-God dess of Cõlas and Pāndyas and began to further address him thus :
“Oh king, in olden times, this sword was made by Viswakarma with the melted splinters of all divine missiles, and he gave it as a present to God Śiva for the destruction of asuras.”
"And that God gave it as a boon to the Pāndya king, pleased with his severe austerities. And his successors had it for a long time and were the unchallenged rulers of their earth.

"Sage Agastya, seeing that the Pāndya race has lost its old virility by the wearing influence of time, has new sent this scimitar to you, oh powerful king.”
"You are by nature daring and wedded to risky enterprises. The possession of this weapon will make you formidable in battle. Forest fire is terrible enough, and if high winds also assist it, who can gauge its all-consuming ferocity?”.
"By the wonderful virtue of being armed with this weapon you will never flag in the field of battle; nor would any harm result from enemy missiles such as sword, disc or bow."
“As you wave this lightning-like sword in battie, not even the God of death can dare oppose you, let alone, others."
"Do you now proceed to Southern ivíadhura and destroy the cruel king of Yavanas who is the enemy of the world, even as Sri Krsna killed the demo nic Kamsa who once ruled there (viz., Northern Madhura)."
"Not for the first time will you now be wear ing this bracelet on your hand, which has been (even on prior occasions) the emblem of your vow of protect ing the three worlds, bracelet which none but you can
wear.”
“Do you scatter the heads of Turuşkas, heads with those swinging tufts, those blood-shot eyes, those ferocious beards and furious-browed foreheads."

“May the sun of your prowess in battle wipe off the smile of moon-light from the faces of the drunken Yavana ladies.”
“Dharma is in great distress by being now sub jected to the scorching influence of the evil-natured Yavanas, and earth in consequence looks parched, as it were; and so may you, by the rain of enemies' blood, allay the latter's susserings.”
“May this sword of yours feast the evil spirits such as katüs, pūtanus and yātudhānas with the blood flowing down from the headless trunks of your evil adversaries.”
"May you erect many a pillar of triumph in the middle of Rāmasētu by dealing destruction to the Turuşka lord who is wedded to nothing but evil do ings and who therefore is to be regarded as the thorny shrub of the three worlds."
"The Kāvēri like a tamed female elephant will regain her normal course in the proper pace only if when you become supreme Governor, Oh Your Majesty".
(N. B.—Only the slokas available in the printed book in whole are translated here and as in the original no numbers are given.)
Thus ends the eighth canto of Virakamparāya çaritam, called Madhurāvijayam, composed by Gangā Dēvi.
