+++
title = "8"

+++
Shlokas 1 to 20: The final battle with the Muslims.  

1. Bow-men severed the hands of elephant riders with Ardhachandra arrows; and they fell down in the pool of blood in the battle field like serpents in the sacrificial fire of Parikshit's son.  
son
2. Pearls from the broken heads of elephants in rut attacked by heroic warriors, fell down blood-tinged like sparks produced in sudden collision.  
3. No sooner did a horseman begin to return after having cut with his sword the frontal globe of an elephant than that elephant was seen seizing his horse between his legs and squeezing him.  
4. The blood flowing from the wounded frontal globes of elephants was seen, being drunk through their trunks by some night-prowling demons in great glee, spitting the pearls that also came with the blood stream.  
5. Birds of prey with a view to taste the inner flesh entered into the body of a dead elephant making it quiver; jackals that mistook it for sign of life fled away, though they very much loved to feast on the body.  
6. Just as the heads cut by wheels were about to fall down, they were snatched away quite afresh with  
1
66
MADHURAVIJAY À M
life by Rākshasa women who desired to wear them as wreaths on their ears.
7. A certain elephant having seized by the foot, and thrown up a warrior with his trunk, wanted to catch him again, as he fell, with his pair of tusks.  
8. A certain brave warrior thrown up by his adversary's elephant alighted on his back with his sword with which he despatched the enemy rider, and installed himself in his place.  
9. A certain warrior, after having been killed by the rain of arrows of his angry adversary, became a god and from his place in swarga rained flowers upon the latter praising his valour with genuine delight.  
10. A certain warrior was struck with a (double edged) lance by his opposing foe, and by embracing the latter with the same lance sticking in his body, wounded him. This act evoked great admiration. Who is there that is not moved by real exhibition of daring qualities?  
11. Two warriors, meeting in single combat, cut each other's head with their swords after a long fight; leaving their bodies there, they went up together at once to celestial regions as close friends.  
12. Some royal warriors, like lions, wandered in the field of battle, and tore the heads of their adver saries with their sharp nails as if the latter were oppos ing elephants.  
MADHURĂVIJAY A M
67
13. With one blow of his sword he (king) split in two both the elephants and their riders with their coat of mail. Their bodies, lying mingled, gave but a slender clue for distinguishing the ranks of elephants from those of foot-soldiers.  
14. The king, by smiting the elephants on their globes, produced many a river of blood scattering the pearls on their head like sands.  
ENT
15. One thought, by looking at them, that there was not only one Tāmraparņi river but several hun dreds of Tāmraparnis.  
U PISSANTRENS720***
16. The heads of other elephants he pierced with his javelins and pearis came out from them. This reminded one of Subrahmanya boring a hole in the krownça mountain through which hosts of swans came out.  
17. The agile king cut and wounded the bodies of those that opposed him, even as a hyena destroys. with his sharp nails, deer caught in front of him.  
tie
18. The brave king pounded the turbaned heads of his enemies with his mace in such a way that the eyes which came out of the sockets sank again in their old places.  
19. When the king, thus began to work destruc tion in the enemy ranks with his several weapons, the opposing army fled before him and disappeared like rains in the huge fires that are started at the end of universe (Pralaya).68  
MADHURAVIJAYAM
20. Not even Parasurāma, Rāma, Bhīma or Arjuna provided such entertainment as the king did to that sage (Nārada) who always loved the sight of good battle.  

Shlokas 21 to 40: Kampaņa met the Sultan in a duel and kilied him. The conquest of Madhurai was accomplished.  
21. Then seeing all his Turuska forces routed in battle, the Yavana king, stringing his fearful bow, met the king Kampa in single combat even as Vritra did the king of the gods.  
22. The warriors regarded him as the embodi ment of both anger and intoxication, his eyes red with the drink of vīra-pāna, and knitted brows on his fore head fearful to look at.  
23. His jewelled tuft in a line of unbroken bril liance as he rode on his fast horse looked like the wreath of his smoking anger which was about to blaze.  
24. The sound produced by his forceful stringing of the bow seemed as if it were emanating from the anklets of the Goddess of Victory, who, after having deserted him so long, was now returning to him in haste.  
25. The brave king Kampa delighted in his hav ing an opponent like the Suratrana (Sultan) who had by his valour reduced the Cõlas and Pāndyas and despoiled the wealth of Vira Ballāla (the Third).  
26. The two proud opponents fought in a manner befitting the respective might of their arms, by shower  
MADHURAVIJAY AM
ing arrows on each other with their bows bent up to their ears.
27. The king of the Yavanas warded off the arrows let fly by king Kampa, which were like the side glances of the Goddess of Heroism. And the king, similarly, checked the Pārasika's (Persian's) arrows which resembled the eye-darts of Yama's sister.  
28. King Kampa let fly against the Yavana king his arrows that had, like serpents, drunk the life breaths of Këralas, like fire had consumed the lords of the Vanya Kingdom, and like the sun had destroyed the dark Andhras.  
29. The scratches caused by the Yavana king's arrow on the person of king Kampa shone like the nail marks of the Goddess of Victory that was so passionate to enjoy her privacy.  
30. The crow banner of the Yavana king which looked like the typification of the crown of Kali age was destroyed by king Kampa, and with that the former's hope of victory also.  
31. The king, with his arrow, cut the bow-string of the Turuşka king who was, in his fury, raining arrows at the former. It was as if the knife was laid on the auspicious chord round the neck of the Rājya lakşmi (kingly prosperity) of the Turuskas.  
32. The Turuşka hero blazing with anger, then threw away his bow, and hastily drew out his terrible  
70
1 MADHURAVIJAY AM sword that was hanging on the side of his horse's saddle.
33. Determined to make an end of the Yavana king, king Kampa also armed himself with that sword which Agastya had sent him, and which looked as terri ble as Yama himself.  
34. That sword, grey-coloured like poisoned fumes as it was being waved by the hand of king Kampa, looked like a serpent about to drink the life breath from the Yavana's body.  
35. Seated on his agile horse, king Kampa, who was the glory of the Karnāta race, avoiding the sword blow aimed by the Yavana, cut off in an instant the head of the latter.  
36. The head of the Suratrāna (Sultan) fell on the ground, the head that never knew the art of cajol ing servant-like, the head that had borne the royal burden of the Turuska Samrājya (Supremacy) and had not bowed down even to gods.  
37. The hero, Kampa, was astonished to see that, even after the head had fallen, the trunk on the horse back still held the reins, checking the horse's course with one hand, while the other was uplifted to return the blow of the adversary.  
38. On the head of king Kampa, held high in pride, fell heaps of flowers rained from the celestial iegions, and those heaps had the appearance of auspicious yellow-rice (aksata) let fall by the Goddess of Kingly Prosperity, on Her self-chosen Lord.
39. Like the beauty of the forest saved from forest-fire, like the view of the sky after the vanishing of an eclipse, or the calm appearance of the river Yamuna after the eradication of the serpent Kāliya, the region of the South shone after the overthrow of the Pārasikas.  
40. King Kamparaya guaranteed the safety of the remaining men in his enemy ranks and was crowned with happiness and glory.  

Thus ends the poem Virakamparāya çaritam. called Madhurāvijayam, composed by Gangā Dēvi.